Metadata-Version: 2.4
Name: pybofa
Version: 0.0.2
Summary: multi-model consensus tool
Author-email: jks <jag5m33@gmail.com>
Requires-Python: >=3.13
Description-Content-Type: text/markdown
Requires-Dist: opencv-python==4.13.0.90
Requires-Dist: numpy==2.4.1
Requires-Dist: tensorflow==2.20.0
Requires-Dist: tqdm==4.67.1
Requires-Dist: pandas==3.0.0
Requires-Dist: matplotlib>=3.10.8
Requires-Dist: scikit-learn>=1.8.0
Requires-Dist: seaborn>=0.13.2
Requires-Dist: tf-keras-vis>=0.8.7
Requires-Dist: plotly>=6.6.0
Requires-Dist: umap-learn>=0.5.11
Requires-Dist: shap>=0.51.0
Requires-Dist: shapely>=2.1.2

## BOFA

BOFA: Bayesian Optimisation & Feature Analysis
1. PROJECT OVERVIEW
BOFA is a machine learning framework developed to detect anomalous athletes exhibiting Growth Hromone (GH)-like biomarker profiles. This project applies a consensus-based anomaly detection approach, combining multiple unserupvised models to identify athletes whose physiological signitures deviate from a learning baseline of normal biological vairation. 
The primary objective is to:

    Detect anomalous (GH-like) athletes from a reference population using a robust, mulit-model consensus framework.

BOFA addresses this by moving away from the commonly used static threshols (like the GH-2000 score) towards a consensus-based anomaly detection approach. The models learns the biological 'norm' with variation from a populaition a nd flags indiivudals who deviate into GH-synonymous physiological spaces.

2. REPO STRUCTURE
The repository is organised into modular segments to ensure reproducability and scalability, with a config file to prevent hard coding variables into the main-body of models. 
/prep   - contains congif.py (centralised parameter management to prevent hardcoding values into the main body script)

/models - machine learning models 

        - ssae.py: Neural Network for dimensionality reduction and reconstruction error (semi-supervised autoencoder)

        - LS.py: Label Spreading is a graphing based learning appraoch whereby the model constructs graphs ismilar to each athlete (as a node) connects to other neighbouring 'nodes'. By spreading labels from 'controls' to unlabelled 'nodes', athletes which are unlabelled can be cateogorised accordingly

        - SVM.py: One-Class Support Vector Machine for boundary detection.
        

bofa_go.py: the primary execusion script which calls definitiions from scripts 

/results - Output CSVs includign flagged athletes and recall calibration logs

This structure ensures that data processing modelling and configuration steps are seperated and imporve maintainability. 

3. DATA PIPELINE 

    STEP 1: Preprocessing (RStudio v 4.5.1)

    Initial data preparation  is performed in R to ensure maximal harmonisation amongst datasets. THey originate from multiple sources with different assays:

        i. Log-Transformation of biomarkers (IGF-I, P-III-NP) to reduce biological skewed distribution 

        ii. Datasets were merged across multiple sources into a unified dataframe 

    STEP 2: Feature Engineering and Extraction (R)
        
        Following the preprocessing additional features were derived

        i. Aggregated biomarker features: 'avg_igf', 'avg_pnp' across assays 

        ii Categorical enconding: sex encoding as binary (0 = male, 1 = female)

        iii. additional source column added: GH_CONTROL (for all gh_administed samples - 99), ATHLETE_REF (for all other remaining athletes to be assessed for doping based on bioamrker scores)

4. MODELLING PIPELINE

PREPERATION: Initial Data prep. was also conductd in python, specifically, robust scaling (normalisation), imupting NA's with median values, etc. 

    - Robust scaling: to handle outliers adn inter-assay vairability
    
    - Imputer based on columnar median values: this is essential, as mean and std could be affected by extreme values which medians are often blind to. Therefore, robust scaling on median values and then imputing NA's based on this is important


THE MODEL ARCHITECTURE: Traditional unsupservised models tend to learn the 'normal' baseline however, BOFA uses a semi-seripvised approach whereby the models express both the unlabelled and labelled (control) samples during trainnig. This way the models are 'guided' to specifically recongise sampels with anomalous behaviour.

MODELS:

    - Semi-Supervised Autoencoder (ssae): A neural network. The unsupervised baseline learns to reconstruct normal athlete profiles; a high reconstructio error flags non-standard physiolgy 

    - Support Vector Machines (One class SVM):  Kernal boundaries. This is a semi-superivised guided classification mode which uses support vector classification with an RBF (kernal) to define high dimensional boundaries specifically when seperating clean and doping samples 

    - Label Spreading (LS) - explained previously.


    

When training the models, it is importnat to note that they are NOT trained as a large group, they are evaluated individually, and then the outputs and evaluated together. They use 2 distinct data sources which define the biological model feautre spaces and prediction generated.
    
    - The ATHLETE_REF - this is the unlabelled 'proposed' population normal baseline; with approx. 6000+ samples representing the 'norm'. Biological variation of elite athltes are found with the 'volume of normality' review.

    - GH_CONTROL - this is the labelled 'positive' group fo athlete; 99 samples whereby GH has knowingly been administed. This defines the target anomaly biological signal.

TRAINING STRATEGY: each model in BOFA learns the data differently 

    - Autoencoder (ae): trained on ATHLETE_REF only.

    - Support Vector Machine/Classifier (SVM): trained on both ATHLETE_REF, GH_CONTROL

    - Label Spreading (LS): trained on both ATHLETE_REF (As unlabeled nodes) and GH_CONTROL (as labelled samples)


5. CONSENSUS FRAMWORK & WEIGHTED SCORING 

The BOFA frameowkr converts raw anomaly scores into a suspician INDEX. This is done using 2 aggregation approaches 
    - this approach mimics a 'panel of judges' whereby different models and their corresponding levels of influence are evaluated

The consensus counts and evaluations: eahc of the models identify their top 5 most suspicious athlets in the latent space

    - Logic: the scoring system tallies up the number of binary flags (0,1) to create an EVALUATIVE/CONSENSUS score 

    - Significance: A score of 3/3 indicates the athlete is most confidently expressed as an outlier according to the AE, LS, SVM; it indicates a high level of agreement 
scores :
    Total Score = sum (Standardized[Score_{i}] x  Weight[{i}])


6. EVALUATION METRICS

Anti-doping models CAN NOT be evaluated on their ACCURACY as the datset is imbalance (99 male control, vs 6000 doping athletes). Instead we look at metrics that view recall (Detection dopers) and precision (not falgging clean athletes)

    1. Precision Recall curves (PR): Unlike ROC curves, PR ignores true negatives; They look for needled in haystacks. It shows how much noise (false positives) to tolerate when catching a certain amount of true positives (dopers)

    2. Target Recall Confusion Matrix (CM): We fix the model threshold to acheive 70% TARGET THRESHOLD. This allows us to view the false positive rate. Answers questions with regards to the threshold: If i were to catch 70% OF ALL DOPERS, HOW MANY INNOCENT ATHLETES WOULD BE FLAGGED ALONG THE WAY. 

    3. 3D t-SNE population map. High dimensional data (6D in the script used) is difficult for human interpretation. Therefore, a compromise of 3 dimensinos is generated. The reduced latent space of 3D provides a map of sigansl which can be used to visualise where GH_CONTROL cases lie in the general population (ATHLETE_REF)

    4. elbow plot - In order to prove that 3-7 dimensions is sufficient for capturing the biological variance exhibited by signals, it is important to view that the compressed latent space co-ordinates have not lost essential information required to detect dopers as noise.


 


            
